GSoC 2025 Clang-Doc blog (#79)
llvm/llvm-blog-www: content/posts/2025-gsoc-clang-doc.md

### The Architecture

Here's a quick overview on Clang-Doc's architecture, which follows a map-reduce pattern:

1. Visit source declarations via Clang's ASTVisitor.
2. Serialize relevant source information into an Info (Clang-Doc's main data entity).
3. Once all source declarations are serialized, write them into bitcode, reduce, and read the reduced Infos.
4. Serialize Infos into the desired format.

It seems fairly straightforward, but the architecture had a critical flaw.
If a new C++ construct needed to be supported, it would be visited and serialized, but then support would have to be added to each backend individually.
If you wanted to serialize something in YAML, you'd have to implement the Markdown logic separately.
This placed a very high maintenance cost for extending basic functionality, even if you just wanted to add something simple.
It also easily led to generator disparity; a construct might be serialized in YAML, but not in Markdown.

Testing was also in an awkward spot because it was unclear what format would be used to verify if the documentation output was acceptable.
YAML was the initial candidate for this, but my mentors had started to consider JSON instead.

> Feature parity was far apart; some backends were tested for certain attributes that others didn't have.

Reviewer: These all seem like disjoint ideas. maybe tie them together a bit more, or just expand this section slightly?

## The Issues

The project idea proposed three main areas of focus to improve documentation quality.

1. C++ support
2. Doxygen comments
3. Markdown support

First, not all C++ constructs were supported, like friends or concepts.
Not supporting core C++ constructs in C++ documentation is not good.
Second, it's important that Doxygen command support is robust and that we can support as many as possible.
Lastly, having Markdown available to developers for documentation would be useful.
Markdown provides the power of expression in an area that is technically dense.
It can be used to highlight critical information and warnings.

### The Architecture

Here's a quick overview on Clang-Doc's architecture, which follows a map-reduce pattern:

1. Visit source declarations via Clang's ASTVisitor.
2. Serialize relevant source information into an Info (Clang-Doc's main data entity).
3. Once all source declarations are serialized, write them into bitcode, reduce, and read the reduced Infos.
4. Serialize Infos into the desired format.

<div style="margin:0 auto;">
  <img src="/img/gsoc-2025-clang-doc-architecture.png"><br/>

> </div>

Reviewer 2: There are no constraints. Take as much time as needed to polish the post :)

When I considered this in my proposal, I knew an in-tree parser would want to conform to the simplest possible standard.
Markdown has no official standard, so I opted for CommonMark conformance.

The summer ended without a complete solution since a couple weeks were spent researching whether or not this could be integrated directly in the Clang comment parser or whether we'd need to build our own solution or not.
You can see my initial draft [here](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/155887).
I plan to continue working on this parser and landing it in Clang-Doc.

# Refactors, Name Mangling, and More!
During my summer, I would stumble into places where I would think "This could be better" and my mentors usually agreed.
Thus, there were a few patches where I dedicated time to general refactors to improve code reuse and hopefully make the lives of future contributors much easier than what I had to go through.
In fact, one of my best refactors was of the JSON generator that I wrote, which my mentor noted had a lot of areas for great code reuse.
Future me was extremely thankful for the easy-to-use functions I had added.

> I also refactored some of the bitcode reader/writer code so that less copy-pasting would be involved in the future.

Reviewer: maybe spend some time highlighting 1-2 of these? An example would go a long way to show the reader the kind of improvement you're talking about.

> Another significant feature that I hadn't planned was name mangling.

Reviewer: The problem you were solving w/ name mangling was the lack of unique file names.

Clang-Doc suffered from a bug where template specializations would be serialized to the same file as their described class because they had the same name.
The YAML backend avoided this problem because its filenames were SymbolIDs, but this meant that the lit tests would have to use regex to find the file for FileCheck.
Nasty.
In HTML, you ended up with a buggy HTML page from duplicate tags.

> In JSON, you get a fatal error since two JSON documents can't live in the same file.

Reviewer: Technically they could if we changed the schema. but that isn't practical with the current way we serialize json to files.

- [refactor JSON for better Mustache compatibility](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/149588)

# Overview
I implemented a new JSON generator that will serve as the basis for Clang-Doc's documentation generation.
This will vastly reduce overall lines of code and maintenance burdens.
I added a lot of tests to increase code coverage and ensure we are serializing all the information necessary for high-quality documentation.
I refactored our comment handling to streamline the logic that handles them and for better output in the HTML.
I also explored options for rendering Markdown and began an implemetation for a parser that I plan on working on in the future.
Along the way, I also did some refactoring to improve code reuse and improved maintenance burdens by reducing boilerplate code.

After my work this summer, Clang-Doc is nearly ready to switch to HTML generation via Mustache templates, which will be a huge milestone.
It is backed by the JSON generator which will allow for a much more flexible architecture that will change how we generate other documentation formats like our existing Markdown backend.

> All of this was achieved with little to no performance loss.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All of this was achieved without compromising the performance of documentation generation.
```

I also hope that future contributors have an easier time than I did learning about and working with Clang-Doc.
The threshold for contributing was high due to a disjointed architecture.

> I'm also very excited to present my work and showcase Clang-Doc at this year's LLVM Dev Meeting during a technical talk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lastly, I'm very excited to present my work and showcase Clang-Doc at this year's LLVM Dev Meeting during a technical talk.
```
There's a couple `I'm also`'s here, and it sounds repetitive.

This is the first time I'll be presenting at a conference and I didn't expect to have the opportunity when I started at the beginning of the summer.

Over the summer, I addressed these issues:
- [template operator T() produces a bad name](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/59812)
- [Add a JSON backend to clang-doc to better leverage mustache templates](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/140094)
- [Reconsider use of enum InfoType::IT_default](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/142888)

> - [Add a JSON backend to clang-doc to better leverage mustache templates](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/140094)

Reviewer: It's not like you shouldn't mention these, but its not really integrated into the post. Maybe some kind of transition would help?

This year, the [GSoC project idea](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/improve-documentation-parsing-in-clang/84513) had a simple premise: improve core functionality.

# The Project

The project idea proposed three main areas of focus to improve documentation quality.

1. C++ support
2. Doxygen comments
3. Markdown support

First, not all C++ constructs were supported, like friends or concepts.
Not supporting core C++ constructs in C++ documentation is not good.
Second, it's important that Doxygen command support is robust and that we can support as many as possible.
Lastly, having Markdown available to developers for documentation would be useful.
Markdown provides the power of expression in an area that is technically dense.
It can be used to highlight critical information and warnings.

# The Architecture

Here's a quick overview on Clang-Doc's architecture, which follows a map-reduce pattern:

<div style="margin:0 auto;">
  <img src="/img/gsoc-2025-clang-doc-architecture.png"><br/>
</div>

1. Visit source declarations via Clang's ASTVisitor.
2. Serialize relevant source information into an Info (Clang-Doc's main data entity).

> 3. Write Infos into bitcode, reduce, and reread.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Write `Info`s into bitcode, reduce, and reread.
```

> 4. Serialize Infos into the desired format with a target backend.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Serialize `Info`s into the desired format with a target backend.
```

The HTML tag creation being so tightly coupled to the documentation serialization also highlights a different problem of formatting problems being difficult to identify.

This lack of generic handling imposed a very high maintenance cost for extending basic functionality.
It also easily led to backend disparity; a construct might be serialized in YAML, but not in Markdown.
Changes to how a documentation entity was handled would not be uniform across backends.

Testing was also in an awkward spot.
If not all backends were guaranteed to generate the same documentation, who could be trusted as the source of truth?
YAML was originally meant to serve this role, but it suffered from feature disparity.
It's a cumbersome process to implement support for a construct in YAML, verify it there, but then also go to implement it in HTML.
There's a logical disconnect: what's serialized in YAML isn't guaranteed to reflect in HTML, so what is the benefit of updating YAML if my documentation is shown through HTML?

## The Good

The good news is that Clang-Doc's recent improvements had brought in changes that could rectify these problems, with a bit more work.

> Last year's GSoC brought in great improvements that became the basis of my summer.

Reviewer 3: I'd linkify this and point to last year's blog post.
```suggestion
[Last year's GSoC](https://blog.llvm.org/posts/2024-12-04-improve-clang-doc/) brought in great improvements that became the basis of my summer.
```

They were just displayed in whatever order they were serialized in, which is the order that they're written in source.
This meant comments would be extremely difficult to read - you don't want to search for another parameter comment after reading the first one, even if they're expected to be written in order in source.

Funnily enough, Mustache made this a little more complicated.
The only logic operation that Mustache has to check if a field exists is an iteration like `{{#Fields}}`, but any header that denotes a comment section would be duplicated.

```html
{{#Fields}}
<h3>Field Header</h3>
  {{FieldInfo}}
{{/Fields}}
```

the `<h3>` header would be duplicated for every iteration over `Fields`.
If the header was outside of the iteration, then it would be displayed even if there weren't any elements in `Fields`.
All of the logic to order them needs to be done in the serialization to JSON itself, so I had overhaul our comment organization.

Previously, Clang-Doc's comments were organized exactly as in Clang's AST like the following:

- FullComment
  - BriefComment
    - ParagraphComment
      - TextComment
      - TextComment
  - BriefComment
    - ParagraphComment

> Everything was unnecessarily nested under a FullComment, and TextComments were also unnecessarily nested.
> Every non-verbatim comment's text was held in one ParagraphComment.
> Since there was only one, we could reduce some boilerplate by directly mapping to the array of TextComments.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Everything was unnecessarily nested under a `FullComment`, and `TextComment`s were also unnecessarily nested.
Every non-verbatim comment's text was held in one `ParagraphComment`.
Since there was only one, we could reduce some boilerplate by directly mapping to the array of `TextComment`s.
```

After the change, Clang-Doc's comments were structured like this:

> - BriefComments
>   - TextCommentArray
>   - TextCommentArray
> - ParagraphComments
>   - TextCommentArray

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `BriefComments`
  - `TextCommentArray`
  - `TextCommentArray`
- `ParagraphComments`
  - `TextCommentArray`
```

- [add return comments to comment template](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/150647)
- [add code comments to comment template](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/150648)

# Markdown
Markdown was the most speculative aspect of the project.
It wasn't clear whether we'd try to integrate a solution into Clang itself or whether we'd keep it in clang-tools-extra.

## A JavaScript Solution
The first option I explored was suggested by my mentor, which was a JavaScript library called [Markdown-Tag](https://github.com/MarketingPipeline/Markdown-Tag).
This would've been really convenient since all it requires is an HTML tag to enable rendering, so any comment text in a template can be easily rendered.
Unfortunately, it requires all HTML to be sanitized, which defeats the purpose of a ready-made solution for us.
We would have to parse any potential HTML in comments anyways.

## A Parser Solution
Without an out-of-the-box solution, we were left with implementing our own parser.
When I considered this in my proposal, I knew an in-tree parser would want to conform to the simplest possible standard.

> Markdown has no official standard, so I opted for CommonMark conformance.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Markdown has no official standard, so I opted for [CommonMark](https://commonmark.org/) conformance.
```

## Mangling Filenames
Clang-Doc had a bug stemming from non-unique filenames.
The YAML backend avoided this problem because its filenames were SymbolIDs, but this meant that the lit tests would have to use regex to find the file for FileCheck.
Nasty.

In HTML and JSON, the filenames for classes were just the class name.
If you had a template specialization, this would cause problems
In HTML, we'd get duplicate HTML resulting in wonky web pages.
In JSON, we'd get a fatal error from the JSON parser since there were two sets of top level braces.
I used `ItaniumMangleContext` to generate mangled names we could use for the filenames.

## Pull Requests

Here are the pull requests I made for refactors during the project:

- [Serialize record files with mangled name](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/148021)
- [refactor BitcodeReader::readSubBlock](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/145835)
- [refactor JSONGenerator array usage](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/145595)
- [refactor JSON for better Mustache compatibility](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/149588)

# Overview

> I implemented a new JSON generator that will serve as the basis for Clang-Doc's documentation generation.
> This will vastly reduce overall lines of code and maintenance burdens.
> I added a lot of tests to increase code coverage and ensure we are serializing all the information necessary for high-quality documentation.
> I refactored our comment handling to streamline the logic that handles them and for better output in the HTML.
> I also explored options for rendering Markdown and began an implementation for a parser that I plan on working on in the future.
> Along the way, I also did some refactoring to improve code reuse and improved maintenance burdens by reducing boilerplate code.

Reviewer 3: I'd consider making this a list for better readability.
```suggestion
- I implemented a new JSON generator that will serve as the basis for Clang-Doc's documentation generation. This will vastly reduce overall lines of code and maintenance burdens.
- I added a lot of tests to increase code coverage and ensure we are serializing all the information necessary for high-quality documentation.
- I refactored our comment handling to streamline the logic that handles them and for better output in the HTML.
- I also explored options for rendering Markdown and began an implementation for a parser that I plan on working on in the future.
- Along the way, I also did some refactoring to improve code reuse and improved maintenance burdens by reducing boilerplate code.
```
